For students working in a miniature factory at the University of Missouri-Rolla , the future of American business is now .
`` When our students go into industry , they will have state-of-the-art knowledge '' that will affect decisions about expanding the role of robots and automated machines in the workplace , said Sema Alptekin , designer of the futuristic business laboratory .
Ms. Alptekin is a mechanical and industrial engineer who directs the university 's computer-integrated manufacturing and packaging laboratory .
The lab , established two years ago at a cost of $120,000 , is the only project of its kind in the state , and one of the more advanced such programs in the country .
Tom Akas of the Society of Manufacturing Engineers said Ms. Alptekin has created `` a model for similar laboratories ... Students can see how the factory of the future operates . ''
The Society of Manufacturing Engineers has recognized Ms. Alptekin as an Outstanding Young Manufacturing Engineer .
In her lab , a conveyer belt at waist level carries parts from storage shelves to a robot that dominates the room like a silent , 4-foot metal sentry .
The robot is a V-shaped , jointed arm on a pivoting base .
The arm can be fitted to allow it to grasp , lift and turn objects of differing sizes to suit a variety of tasks .
The robot then swivels to place parts in position at the automated lathe or milling machine .
The entire factory would fit inside a basketball half-court .
The machinery is of the type used to make small parts in metal cutting shops , Ms. Alptekin said .
Students learn to program a computer and automated machines linked to it in a complete manufacturing operation - retrieving raw materials from the storage shelf unit , which can be programmed to supply appropriate parts from its inventory ; lifting and placing the parts in position with the robot 's arm ; and shaping parts into finished products at the lathe .
Students using the lab have designed and produced engraved key chains and intricate mazes and puzzles out of plastic and plexiglass .
But the product is less important than the process .
Ms. Alptekin said former students have entered fields as disparate as aviation and financial consulting .
In the factory of the future , according to the university 's model , human chatter will be replaced by the click-clack of machines .
`` Ours is quite unique , it 's totally integrated , '' Ms. Alptekin said , referring to programming that allows components such as the automated storage system to `` talk to '' the computer that controls the manufacturing process , informing it about the availability of parts .
Ms. Alptekin said it is this aspect that sets the lab apart even from industries where robots and automated machines have become almost commonplace .
There , she said , robots perform specific tasks in `` islands of automation , '' but human workers remain responsible for keeping inventory and coordinating different aspects of the production line .
Ms. Alptekin said automation is widespread in the automobile industry , but she would like to see it expanded .
`` It should be used in any industry , '' she said .
`` It 's difficult to justify economically , but if quality is the concern , then it can be easily justified .
`` At least our students will be aware of the enhancements and developments in this area , and when they make decisions as engineers and managers , they will take this into consideration , '' she said .
A master 's candidate analyzed the existing system with an eye to altering it to create a new product .
Ms. Alptekin said the student identified what new production components were necessary and determined how they could be integrated into the system .
A doctoral candidate is developing computer software that will allow the system to diagnose itself .
The system could be programmed to recognize when a component is not working , and then decide to switch to manufacturing a product that does not involve the disabled component , much as human managers would react .
Graduate student Bob Borchelt said the equipment he is using is on the cutting edge of manufacturing .
`` Truthfully , I ca n't say that I was expecting this level of expertise , '' he said .
`` I know that our lab is one of the best of its kind in an educational institution . ''
The lab , like the entire engineering management program , calls on computing , mechanical , electrical and chemical skills - and teamwork .
`` For us , for managers , the entire system is important , '' Ms. Alptekin said .
Ms. Alptekin said she is continually fine-tuning the lab .
She now is considering purchasing a robot with vision sophisticated enough to act as an inspector .
The university spent $30,000 to upgrade lab equipment in 1987 .
An estimated $60,000 to $70,000 was earmarked in 1988 .
International Business Machines Corp. recently pledged $1.2 million in computer equipment and software to the university as part of an IBM program to aid 48 college-based robotics labs across the country .
`` Studies show that there 's a severe national shortage of instructional materials in this growing and critical area , '' said Andy Russell , a spokesman for IBM .
`` IBM will benefit because we will be helping to train the ( computer-integrated manufacturing ) workers and decision makers of today and tomorrow . ''
