`` Desire Under the Elms , '' a new opera based on Eugene O'Neill 's play of the same name , is blessed with a story perfect for opera -- full of rivalry , greed , sex and violence .
Soprano Judy Kaye , who won a Tony on Broadway last year , stars in the New York Opera Repertory Theater production , and is splendid in the pivotal role of Abbie .
But the music composed by Edward Thomas does n't have all the power it needs .
The opera had its first staged presentation Wednesday at the City Center .
Operas these days are melodic , minimalist or have a jagged vocal line that does n't sound like a melody to most listeners .
`` Desire Under the Elms '' is of the latter kind .
That 's fine and this opera sounds good much of the time .
But in arias expressing emotion for instance , it often sounds bland .
A lullaby is a departure from the rest of the music .
But when a very dramatic moment comes , that music should also be a departure , hitting some heights .
In `` Desire Under the Elms , '' the drama is principally carried by the situation and the words being sung .
Abbie marries elderly Ephraim Cabot ( bass Nicholas Solomon ), seduces his son Eben ( tenor James Schwisow ) and has a baby .
Abbie , Ephraim and Eben each want total ownership of the farm on which they live .
So the stew of sex , love and deception is further stirred by mistrust of love based on what any one might do to get the farm .
The orchestral scoring is n't heavy so most of the words could be understood .
The men 's voices were good but not big , an appraisal which extends to Robert Paul Heimann and William Livingston , as two older sons who leave home before Abbie arrives .
Miss Kaye 's voice most nearly filled the house .
The New York Opera Repertory Theater was founded in 1977 by Leigh Gibbs Gore , who conducted the opera .
It is dedicated to creation and performance of opera and new music theater .
Composer Thomas is a native of Chisholm , Minn .
Joe Masteroff , who wrote the book for Broadway 's `` She Loves Me '' and `` Cabaret , '' is making his debut as a librettist .
`` Desire Under the Elms '' was done in a workshop at the O'Neill Theater Center 's National Music Theater Conference , in its first year , 1978 .
It also has had concert performances .
The set for this first staged presentation was a cutaway two-story house by Michael Anania .
Gregg Barnes designed costumes and David Gately directed .
It will be performed again on Friday and Sunday .
