The long Palestinian uprising has brought bitterness to Israeli humor , and the comedian 's opener was not meant to put his audience at ease .
`` Soldiers in uniform get in with a discount , '' Yonathan Geffen said , and after a pause: `` Soldiers with clubs get in free . ''
He referred to beatings by soldiers of protesters in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip , where more than 300 Palestinians have been killed and thousands wounded .
Such a joke would have been unthinkable before the rebellion began Dec. 8 , 1987 .
In night clubs , theaters and galleries , artists of various kinds grapple with questions about the violence of occupation and the brutalizing effect on Israeli society of the army 's handling of the uprising .
A satire by nightclub performer Dudu Topaz takes the form of an army radio report of an incident said to have begun when a young Palestinian urinated on a soldier 's leg .
The army arrests his entire family and destroys their house , and an officer declares on the radio: `` The youth was known as a potential terrorist . ''
A reporter finds the perpetrator , but discovers he is not yet old enough to talk .
Performing artists have collided with those who control state-run radio and television .
Topaz was barred from a radio talk show for two weeks for comments critical of the army .
Israel television rejected a skit by comedian Tuvia Tzafir that attacked public apathy by depicting an Israeli family watching TV while a fire raged outside .
Lyrics in `` Coexistence With Love , '' a new album by vocalist Astar Shamir , accuse the government of failing to explore options for peace while young soldiers do the dirty work of occupation .
As one of her songs , `` A Moment Before the Storm , '' puts it: `` My brother is n't a cruel soldier , but he 's cold in his soul .
He stands there with his hand on the trigger , but he hates the war .
... Do n't send my brother to the trigger . ''
Ms. Shamir said in an interview: `` When I sat opposite the television last January , and they started showing me what was happening , I could n't sleep nights .
I know songs do n't change things and ca n't move armies , but ... they just came pouring out . ''
Early last year , army radio banned pop singer Si Hyman 's song `` Shooting and Crying '' about soldiers who used a bulldozer to bury four young Palestinians alive in a West Bank village .
The victims survived , and the soldiers were given jail terms of up to a year .
`` Have we forgotten our children were killed , too ? ''
Hyman asks in the chorus , alluding to the Nazi extermination of 6 million Jews .
In a Jaffa nightclub , Tzafir performs a skit accusing Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir of ignoring opportunities for peace .
It depicts Shamir visiting an eye doctor and refusing to read a wall chart that says , `` There are Palestinians , '' and in smaller letters , `` There is a chance for peace . ''
`` My vision is too good , '' Shamir says .
`` I need something to block all this out . ''
Palestinians have incorporated themes of the uprising into songs and plays .
Words of a protest song reflect the tendency toward rhetoric: `` With the Molotov ( gasoline bomb ), with the stones , I make my revolution .
... With the stones , we get rid of the enemy . ''
An art exhibit at the Hakawati Theatre in Arab east Jerusalem was a series of portraits of Palestinians killed in the rebellion .
The new play `` Waiting for the Savior '' depicts buffoon-like Israeli soldiers harassing Palestinians going about their daily lives .
`` Everything is political , '' said Jamal Ghosheh , director of the theatre .
`` We are talking about our lives .
Our lives are political . ''
For Israeli performers , who do active and reserve army duty like everyone else , it is more complicated .
At one point in his show , Topaz stopped and said , `` I wonder if I have the right to do this .
I 'm laughing at everyone , but I 'm laughing at myself as well , because I , too , am a soldier . ''
The comedian , whose father came here from the Soviet Union , said in an interview: `` This is not the country I wanted .
It 's not the kind of behavior I want .
If someone had told my father he was coming to live in a country that would rule another nation , he never would have come . ''
