A generation ago , when this was Saigon , American officers lived and played in the Rex Hotel , a sandbagged fortress frequently silhouetted against the night sky by flares and tracer bullets .
Today , sedans instead of jeeps drive up to its doors , and uniformed doormen rather than military guards greet them .
The Rex now beckons foreign businessmen and tourists , not soldiers .
This is the new Vietnam , leaving its course of economic self-destruction , opening its doors , courting capitalism .
Its young are attuned more to American jeans , pop music and the good life than to a war with America they never really knew .
`` In 1975 , at that time , I was just seven ; I do n't know anything , '' said Thu An , a 20-year-old classical violinist studying at the Ho Chi Minh Conservatory of Music .
It was in April of 1975 that the long war ended .
In the fifth floor restaurant of the Rex , beneath the chandeliers , Thu An entertains American tourists with such ballads as `` I Left My Heart In San Francisco '' and `` The Shadow of Your Smile '' as they dine on lobster and Chateaubriand .
There even was a `` Happy Birthday '' salute -- that venerable bit of Americana -- for Jackie Gershen , a San Diego travel agent who turned 47 .
Black-tied waiters brought a birthday cake decked with lighted candles .
For the masses , things remain the same , at least for the moment .
They struggle to survive along with their proud and stubborn country , which exiled itself and waited in vain for what it considered its due from the world for standing up to the Giant of the West .
Throngs of unemployed wander the streets of Ho Chi Minh City , once the boisterous capital of South Vietnam .
Vietnam 's unemployment rate is about 25 percent and the cost of living increased in 1988 by 7 percent to 11 percent a month .
Like the violinist Thu An , many young Vietnamese have no emotional attachment to the war , in which the United States took part from 1961 to 1975 .
They are restless , impatient , looking to personal futures of education , jobs and travel abroad .
They envy affluent Asian neighbors and countrymen who went to America as refugees and prospered .
Some older southerners live in the past , the good old days when millions of American dollars propped up the economy and brought Saigonese the luxuries they no longer can afford .
More workers and government officials are speaking out about the hardships .
Nguyen Van Thuong , maitre d'hotel at the Ramuncho Restuarant favored by Americans in the war years , is unhappy with the measly $50 a month he is paid for the same job at the Rex .
`` I do not have enough food for my family , '' said Thuong , who is 53 and has six children .
`` I work much but I receive nothing .
At Ramuncho , I was happy . ''
He looked around the room and added: `` There are government officials everywhere , but we do n't scare because our life go down . ''
Some officials agree with him .
One is Nguyen Xuan Oanh , a Harvard-educated economist for the old Saigon regime who advises the communist government in Hanoi and serves in the National Assembly .
`` It has deteriorated , '' he said .
`` We try very hard to keep some of the hotels in a decent state so the foreign investors can come in .
We need capital .
We need more industrial ventures .
We need technology .
We have plenty of labor . ''
The Vietnamese look to the United States for these necessities of transition from failed central planning to a market-oriented economy that allows free enterprise , competition and foreign investment .
Oanh said it does not mean the end of communism , or socialism as it is called here .
He explained:  `` Socialism is not an end in itself .
There are so many variations of the same thing .
We try very hard to keep away from ideology .
`` Whatever the Americans , the Europeans have done , this is the result of thousands of years of experience .
Let 's just take that .
Do n't say this belongs to capitalism or what .
Take the best of both worlds and build the economy of Vietnam . ''
In keeping with the new approach , Oanh was blunt in evaluating the economy:  `` We have had a lot of state enterprise , but these guys are no good because they just wait for the government .
... They do n't care whether ( what they make ) can be sold or not .
`` Now it 's different .
We now allow the private businessman to really worry about production so they have to watch their step .
They have to worry about marketing , everything , just like any other businessman . ''
Vietnam now imports three times more than it exports , but officials hope the United States will help by providing financial aid and lifting its trade embargo once diplomatic relations are established .
They say that should happen within a few years .
A major sticking point is the Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia , which began with an invasion in December 1978 .
Occupation troops and the government Vietnam installed are fighting a civil war with Cambodian guerrillas .
`` If there is a political solution , Vietnam will withdraw all its troops at the latest by next September , '' said Maj. Gen. Tran Cong Man , editor of the army newspaper .
`` If there is no political solution now , Vietnam will withdraw all its troops in 1990 .
There will be nothing to settle and to debate .
Then the Americans will have no reason not to establish diplomatic relations . ''
Half a million southerners , many of whom worked for the U.S. government , have applied for exit visas to America , to join relatives or in hopes of jobs and business opportunities .
Tens of thousands have spent years trying to get out and their struggle has an ironic counterpoint: Members of the first emigrant wave , many of them now American citizens , return by the thousands for short visits with relatives and pour badly needed dollars into the economy .
Gen. Nguyen Vinh Nghi , 58 , who was captured by North Vietnamese troops shortly before the fall of South Vietnam on April 30 , 1975 , hopes to take his wife and three children to the United States .
He was released from prison camp a year ago and says: `` I have nothing to do here . ''
