Public school officials , concerned that students may be living on the streets , opened homeless shelters in two Houston schools Thursday so needy pupils can get beds , showers and a meal .
A 12-year-old girl who had been sleeping under an abandoned house was the first of eight people to enter the shelters , officials said .
`` We did n't discuss anything with the child when she came in , '' said school board President Melody Ellis .
`` Right now she 's playing checkers with one of the administrators .
We just tried to give her encouragement and let her play . ''
The shelters will remain open nightly until at least Jan. 20 , when the superintendent the Houston Independent School District will recommend to the school board that the program be continued or modified .
Within an hour of opening , six children arrived at the shelters , and Ms. Ellis said four other young boys who showed up at one of the campuses left before entering , apparently because of television cameras nearby .
`` It is drizzling outside and it is extremely cold , and I would really like for these children to come in , '' Ms. Ellis said when asking reporters to leave the area .
Temperatures were in the low 40s Thursday night .
By late evening eight youths and one parent were in the two shelters , including a homeless woman with five children , all enrolled in Houston schools , and a 14-year-old dropout .
Houston is estimated to have 20,000 to 25,000 people who live on the streets or in shelters , but it 's uncertain how many of those are children .
The school shelters are not intended for children whose families are staying in city shelters , but rather for those pupils who seem to live alone on the streets .
`` We 've had teachers discovering students sleeping in areas around schools , storing clothes under houses in the neighborhood and some who are asking for help , '' school district spokesman Larry Yawn said .
It 's not certain why those pupils are on the streets , however .
Judy Hay , of Harris County Children 's Protective Services , said use of the term `` homeless '' for the school program may be a misnomer .
`` I know there 's children out there , '' she said .
`` But I certainly did n't think they were in school .
These children have a home somewhere , but they either are abused or choose not to be at home . ''
Ms. Hay said programs already exist for `` truly homeless '' children , whose parents , for example , may be living out of their cars .
Other social service programs also exist for children who need a `` cooling-off '' time away from their parents , she said .
`` There are vacancies in shelters right now , '' Ms. Hay said .
`` It 's going to be interesting to find out what these principals have been seeing . ''
Under the Schoolhouse Shelters program , approved this week and announced Wednesday , volunteers from the school system and other social agencies will staff the shelters , which officials hope may lead to more permanent assistance for homeless youths seeking help in a familiar place .
One school is set up to handle children from kindergarten through eighth grade .
The other is intended for high school students .
The Red Cross has donated 75 beds and blankets .
Existing showers and dressing rooms in gymnasiums of the schools will be used , officials said .
The cost to the school district , while not yet determined , should be minimal , officials said .
The district is providing food -- soup and sandwiches -- and security guards .
The program will serve only students enrolled in the Houston Independent School District , among the nation 's 10-largest districts with about 190,000 students .
Security officers will guard against drugs and weapons , and Yawn said hand-held metal detectors will be used at the school entrance .
Students entering the shelters , operated from 5:30 p.m. until 7 a.m. , will have to prove they are enrolled before entering .
