Surviving crew members of the World War II submarine Finback are looking forward to a nostalgic reunion with George Bush , the young Navy pilot they dubbed `` Ellie the Elephant '' after rescuing him from the Pacific Ocean more than 44 years ago .
Don Kohler , 64 , of Rogers , Ark. , the torpedoman who helped pull a grateful Bush to safety from his orange life raft onto the Finback 's deck , remembers offering a smile and a hearty `` welcome aboard , '' but recalls little else about the incident .
`` At that time , he was just another downed pilot , '' said Kohler , a retired Chicago businessman .
`` Nobody back then knew he 'd become president of the United States . ''
Rescued after his plane was shot down by Japanese fire , Bush eagerly took his turn at night lookout watches and other seagoing duties , watched Betty Grable movies in the wardroom and donned earphones to listen in awe as the submarine 's torpedoes sank two enemy ships .
Former Finback officers remember the 20-year-old Bush as a gregarious jokester who earned the nickname `` Ellie '' for his comic wardroom imitation of a trumpeting elephant , they said in recent telephone interviews .
`` I remember he was very lively , obviously intelligent and very personable , '' said retired Rear Adm. Lawrence Heyworth of Virginia Beach , Va. , who was the Finback 's torpedo and gunnery officer when Bush was hauled aboard on Sept. 2 , 1944 .
Said Heyworth: `` All three pilots we rescued were bright , bright-eyed young men , but George seemed the most outgoing and had the most ebullient personality .
He was the most entertaining , and he made us laugh a lot .
`` We called him Ellie because of his outstanding imitation of an elephant trumpeting .
Ellie the Elephant .
It was n't because we all sat around thinking we were Republicans .
We must have seen one in a Tarzan movie .
We just thought elephants were funny .
We kept asking George to do it over and over again . ''
`` He had a tremendous sense of humor , '' recalled W.E. `` Bill '' Edwards of Bay St. Louis , Miss. , an insurance agent and retired Navy commander .
As a bearded ensign aboard the Finback , Edwards filmed Bush 's rescue with an 8mm Kodak movie camera .
Edwards said that at last count , nearly 30 surviving officers and enlisted crewmen of the Finback were planning to attend Bush 's swearing-in at noontime Jan. 20 at the Capitol .
They and a few of Bush 's former flying buddies plan to sit together in prime bleacher seats on Pennsylvania Avenue for the inaugural parade after Bush takes the presidential oath of office .
Inaugural officials reportedly were trying to arrange a reunion for Bush and his old submarine buddies at Blair House , the presidential guest quarters across the street from the White House , possibly next Wednesday .
Heyworth and Edwards have stayed in touch with Bush over the years .
But most of the Finback veterans have n't seen or spoken to Bush since he left the submarine at Midway Island after a month-long combat patrol .
Bush won the Distinguished Flying Cross for completing his bombing run against a Japanese radio communications center in the Bonin Islands , about 600 miles south of Japan , after his Grumman Avenger torpedo bomber was struck by enemy fire and engulfed in flames .
Bush bailed out over the water but his two crew members were lost .
According to his autobiography , Bush 's only injuries were a gash on the forehead and a painful sting from a Portuguese man-of-war .
He was picked up by the Finback less than two hours after his parachute hit the ocean .
`` I 'm proud of what I was able to do to help Mr. Bush on board our boat , '' said Kohler .
But Dan Moody , 71 , a Finback veteran and retired radiation laboratory technician living in Albany , Calif. , gave little thought to Bush at the time .
`` We brought him aboard , dried him out and gave him hot coffee , '' he said , and then forgot him .
`` I was 26 years old and a first class torpedoman , '' Moody said .
`` Who 'd pay any attention to a 20-year-old kid ? ''
