Early in William J. Bennett 's tenure as secretary of education , when he was still on speaking terms with the National Education Association , the teacher union asked Bennett what he would do if he had a magic wand to wave over American s chools .
`` No drugs -- none , zero , out , gone , disappear , '' replied the blunt-spoken educator .
`` Give me a wand ?
All the drugs: gone . ''
During his 3 years in the Reagan Cabinet , the conservative and combative Bennett often spoke out about the drug `` plague '' and chafed at what he felt was an inadequate effort by the Reagan team to combat the problem .
Now , as President-elect Bush 's choice to be the nation 's first drug czar , it will fall on the shoulders of the burly former college football lineman to find a way to win that war .
Bennett , 45 , was a headline-grabbing education secretary who railed against rising college costs and slipshod standards , and spoke his mind freely on topics in and out of his field , from defense of Western civilization courses to AIDS to a trip to Managua to thumb his nose at the Sandinista government .
His spirited defense of education budget cuts -- including a 1987 attempt to cut in half a $200 million drug education program -- made him unpopular with school groups and some lawmakers .
It was Bennett who made the call to embattled Supreme Court nominee Douglas H. Ginsburg in November 1987 suggesting Ginsburg withdraw because of his admitted use of marijuana while a law professor .
Bennett himself grew up in the raucous 1960s , flirted with the idea of joining the radical Students for a Democratic Society at Williams College and had a blind date as a graduate student in Texas with hard-rocking Janis Joplin , who later died of a drug overdose .
A onetime rock band guitarist , he is an unabashed fan of early rock ' n ' roll of the Buddy Holly and Ritchie Valens variety .
In an interview with The Associated Press after the Ginsburg affair , Bennett said he and Joplin just `` drank a couple of beers . ''
He turned aside a question about whether he had ever used marijuana , saying , `` I will not join this procession of confessors .
If I have any confessions to make , I will make them to a priest .
I will stipulate for the record , however , I was young . ''
But Bennett had said flatly in prior interviews that he never tried illicit drugs .
Bush was asked at Thursday 's announcement if he knew his new drug czar was `` addicted to nicotine . ''
Bush referred the question to Bennett , but added , `` He knows his mandate . ''
Bennett , a longtime two-pack-a-day smoker , told reporters , `` You will not have a director of national drug control policy who smokes . ''
Asked when he was quitting , Bennett , whose post requires Senate confirmation , said , `` By the time I 'm national director . ''
He left Reagan 's Cabinet in September to write , open a small policy shop called the Madison Center , and deliver lectures at reported fees of up to $15,000-per-apperance .
He found fault with the Reagan war on drugs , best known for Nancy Reagan 's `` just say no '' crusade .
`` An all-out war on drugs -- with more resources for police , more prosecutors , more convictions , more jail sentences -- would be popular with the American people ... and it would be the right thing to do , '' Bennett said in an interview with the Heritage Foundation 's Policy Review magazine .
`` I wish we had done more in the area of drugs .
We have done a lot more than some people will give us credit for , but our policies on drugs could have been more coherent , more direct .
We could have taken not only the moral lead , which I think President Reagan did , but more of the legislative lead , '' he said .
According to an account in the New Republic last May 23 , Bennett repeatedly urged the Pentagon and then-Attorney General Edwin Meese to unleash the U.S. military against foreign drug traffickers .
`` The military should do to the drug barons what our forces in the Persian Gulf did to Iran 's navy , '' Bennett reportedly advised in one memo .
Bennett is a Brooklyn-born son of a bank officer and a medical secretary who was raised in the Virginia suburbs of Washington after his parents divorced .
He majored in philosophy at Williams after abandoning plans to pursue a career in advertising .
After obtaining his Ph.D. in philosophy from the University of Texas at Austin and his law degree at Harvard , Bennett taught at several campuses and eventually ran the National Humanities Center in Research Triangle Park , N.C .
He was chairman of NEH from 1981-1985 .
As the third education secretary , he made headlines from the start , when he defended steep student aid cuts by suggesting some students would simply have to undergo `` divestiture of certain sorts: stereo divestiture , automobile divestiture , three-weeks-at-the-beach divestiture . ''
He infuriated college administrators with his broadsides against rising costs , and once challenged them to start the new academic year by sending each of America 's 12 million college students a letter warning that drug use would not be tolerated .
But even some of his enemies admired the flood of attention he brought to education .
In a Wall Street Journal poll of notables last spring , Bennett emerged as the choice for best Reagan appointee .
Bennett and his wife , Elayne , a social worker , have a 5-year-old son , John .
