Uniformed men beat up Cecilio Aguilar beneath an avocado tree , marched him and two friends down a wooded path and pounded them to death with rifle butts , witnesses say .
Leftist guerrillas captured Francisco Diaz as he was searching for three wayward cows , took him away and shot him .
The killings are examples of the growing toll of politically motivated slayings in El Salvador in 1988 as both sides in a 9-year-old civil war grow frustrated with a stalemate .
The Roman Catholic Church 's Legal Aid office has counted 181 summary killings in the first 11 months of 1988 , compared with 129 in all of 1987 .
Catholic Archbishop Arturo Rivera Damas said during his homily Sunday that altogether 1,369 civilians , soldiers or leftist rebels were killed last year in military clashes , rightist death squad operations and car bombings or other terrorist acts .
The war has claimed an estimated 65,000 lives since it began .
`` It is so hard to see any sort of light , '' said a church worker who has spent nearly two decades in Morazan , an eastern province divided between guerrillas and government forces .
`` It 's so disheartening because you had the feeling things were getting better .
And now you feel them going backward , getting worse , '' the worker said on condition he not be identified .
When the uniformed men had finished killing Cecilio , they went back to his house to demand food and his weapon .
His mother could give them only tortillas .
`` They said he was a guerrilla .
But my son had no weapon , only a machete , '' said Dominga Aguilar .
In her one-room mud brick home , she recounted through sobs the events of Nov. 12 , when men she described as government soldiers swept into this hamlet .
Francisco Diaz was the former mayor of another small town , Lolotique , 12 miles from Piedra He was searching for cows with his brother Dec. 6 when leftist guerrillas captured him , his wife said .
They killed him for what they said was his complicity in a U.S.-imposed counterinsurgency plan .
The cases in Lolotique and Piedra Luna , a village of a dozen households 90 miles east of San Salvador , are not unique .
Respect for human rights improved steadily from 1984 until 1988 .
The early 1980s were a time of slaughter when soldiers and rightist death squads were blamed for the slayings of about 30,000 people .
The United States , which has provided more than $3 billion in aid this decade , told Salvadoran authorities in 1983 that support would dry up if the rights situation did not improve .
Salvadoran authorities say the government no longer has any ties with right-wing death squads .
The leftist guerrillas have killed eight mayors and 32 other civilians in 1988 for allegedly collaborating with the army .
The Catholic Legal Aid office blames the army for 90 summary executions of suspected guerrilla collaborators .
Death squads are blamed for 51 murders .
The slayings of Aguilar , 17 , Hernan Benitez , 18 and Dolores Pineda , 24 , devastated their families , the community council they all sat on and the village soccer team .
Benitez was the goalie , Aguilar a fullback and Pineda a midfielder .
Benitez died with his soccer shoes on .
`` I wo n't play ever again , '' his mother , Amalia , quoted him as saying as he laced up the cleats before being taken away .
`` He knew .
He lifted the dog 's front paws and danced with him .
He kissed the baby and said , ` This is it , Ma .
I 'm saying goodbye , ' '' she said .
Those who took them away were government soldiers , six witnesses said .
Hernan 's mother said the officer in charge repeatedly accused the family of setting corn aside for the guerrillas .
Arturo Rivera Damas , archbishop of San Salvador , also has blamed army troops for the Piedra Luna killings and called for an investigation .
Lt. Col. Oscar Leon Linares denied army responsibility .
He blamed the guerrillas , claiming they wanted to discredit the armed forces .
He said army records show no troops near Piedra Luna on Nov. 12 .
He denied a request to see the records , saying they were classified .
He said the case is closed .
Aguilar 's 15-year-old brother has been a guerrilla for a year , Mrs. Aguilar said .
Benitez 's father was detained for four days in October , and - according to his family - he was severely beaten and accused of guerrilla sympathies .
The three young men , though perhaps not outright collaborators , maintained friendly relations with rebels who pass through regularly , villagers said .
The community council they sat on functions with tacit guerrilla approval .
When the guerrillas kill civilians , they usually announce it on their clandestine Radio Venceremos .
The radio announced Dec. 9 that Diaz , the former mayor , was found guilty of `` crimes against the people . ''
He was the secretary-general of the governing Christian Democratic Party in Lolotique .
He had been kidnapped by the guerrillas for five months in 1985 .
`` We explained to him how mayors are tools for the implementation of the counterinsurgency plan ... but he did not obey , and continued implementing the plan in Lolotique , '' said the broadcast .
`` He helped whomever he could , '' said his widow , Blanca , in their home .
The room where she sat contained a sort of shrine - a crucifix and her husband 's photograph surrounded by flowers in coffee cans .
`` Maybe they killed him for helping the community , '' she said , a tear tracking down her cheek .
