The victims of Agent Orange finally will get their compensatory payments in 1989 , more than a decade after Vietnam veterans first sued the defoliant 's makers and 16 years after the U.S. pullout from Indochina .
The first payments are expected to go out in March or April .
More than 64,000 applications have been mailed to veterans or their families , and 2,000 to 3,000 additional veterans applied before the Jan. 1 deadline for cash benefits that will average about $5,700 .
The money for veteran 's payments comes from a $170 million fund , part of the settlement of a class-action lawsuit brought in 1978 .
The total settlement was $180 million , but the fund has grown to $240 million with interest .
Payments will be made to individuals , to families and to social service agencies that help Vietnam veterans , said Kenneth Feinberg , the court-appointed special master who helped settle the suit .
`` My feelings are ones of frustration and relief , '' said Feinberg .
`` Frustration because it took so long and relief because those who are entitled to the money will finally get it . ''
The court has estimated that about 30,000 veterans and 18,000 survivor families will be eligible for the special benefits .
Early projections showed eligible veterans would receive an average total of about $5,700 ; the most anyone can expect to receive is $12,800 .
`` Even though it may not be enough money , what it does is begin the healing process , '' said Frank McCarthy , a veteran who was active in the litigation .
`` These children , these families who have lost loved ones , these totally disabled veterans are the bottom line and we have to help them now . ''
The federal lawsuit was brought in 1978 by veterans who claimed exposure to the chemical defoliant - sprayed over Southeast Asia during the 1960s by the U.S. military in an attempt to deprive Communist troops of crops and cover - caused cancer , birth defects in their children and other illnesses .
The herbicide contains the highly toxic chemical dioxin .
In 1984 , hours before the trial was to start , the seven manufacturers of the chemical agreed to pay $180 million but denied liability for any injuries .
The money has been tied up since in legal challenges .
The U.S. Supreme Court cleared the last obstacle in June , and soon after , U.S. District Judge Jack B. Weinstein announced plans for dispersal of the money .
Weinstein , who presided over the case and continues to oversee the distribution , split the settlement fund .
The first component sets aside $170 million for the Agent Orange Veteran Payment Program , which will provide cash benefits to veterans considered totally disabled under Social Security guidelines and to the families of veterans whose deaths were linked to Agent Orange .
An additional $52 million was earmarked for the Agent Orange Class Assistance Program , which will distribute grants to social service agencies that serve Vietnam veterans and their families .
Of the remaining money , $5 million was distributed to Australian and New Zealand military personnel who were exposed to Agent Orange in Vietnam , and $13 million went for attorneys ' fees and other expenses .
The Jan 1. deadline does not affect veterans who later become aware of an Agent Orange-connected illness or succumb to such a disease .
Those claims can be filed until Dec. 31 , 1994 .
Aetna Life Insurance Co. was appointed to process the claims and set up a separate unit in Hartford , Conn. , to administer the payment program , according to Bill Cotter , a consultant for the company .
He said Aetna already has received back 10,000 filled-out applications of the 64,000 sent out .
A toll-free telephone number drew more than 60,000 calls , he said .
`` We have had so many different types of calls - the very angry veterans who are quite abusive on the phones , the very courteous who are pleased with the information and the veterans who have broken down and sobbed , '' he said .
The assistance program is headed by Dennis Rhoades , a Vietnam veteran who was director of the American Legion 's National Economic Commission .
Rhoades said he is reviewing about 140 proposals from agencies seeking grants from the $52 million fund .
He expects to authorize the first grants in three to six months .
