The Energy Department is proposing an $81 billion , 20-year program to clean up and modernize the nation 's troubled nuclear weapons production complex .
`` The cost of modernization and environmental restoration will require a significant increase in funding for the next two decades , '' said an Energy Department report for delivery to Congress .
The $81 billion total includes $52 billion to modernize outdated facilities , some of which are more than 30 years old , while $29 billion would go toward efforts to deal with radioactive and chemical contamination at many sites throughout the weapons complex .
The long-range plan would involve building new facilities in South Carolina and Idaho as well as phasing out weapons production activities in Washington state , Colorado and Ohio .
The Energy Department has refused to release any portions of the classified document , known as the `` 2010 Report '' because it looks ahead as far as the 2010 fiscal year .
Gail Bradshaw , deputy chief spokesman for the department , said this week the department could not release the report 's unclassified executive summary until it had received permission to do so from the National Security Council .
A copy of the summary was obtained by Morris News Service and made available to The Associated Press .
Energy Secretary John S. Herrington said Dec. 22 the next administration faces `` hard choices '' in dealing with the problems of the nuclear weapons complex .
He told a National Press Club audience that cannibalization of some warheads to build or upgrade others is something `` we must look at to keep our options open . ''
But Herrington added , `` I do not anticipate the need '' to resort to such methods .
The possibility of cannibalizing warheads was raised after safety and equipment problems closed the nation 's three reactors for producing tritium , a radioactive isotope of hydrogen .
Because tritium decays at a rate of 5.5 percent a year , it needs to be regularly replenished to keep warheads at peak explosive power .
Herrington has said it will be spring or summer before any of the three reactors at the Savannah River Plant near Aiken , S.C. , can be restarted .
The 2010 Report raises questions about whether the Savannah River reactors can be brought back to efficient production of tritium .
It noted that `` all three reactors are shut down for safety system improvements and are not expected to be fully operational until late 1989 .
Despite these improvements and increasingly extensive maintenance , the reactors may not be able to achieve acceptable production efficiencies . ''
Other key findings of the report:  ->The nuclear weapons complex must be modernized so nuclear deterrence can continue to be a vital element of U.S. security policy .
->Operations of the complex will require environmental , safety and health remedial actions and a program to ensure that its operations comply with applicable laws , standards and regulations .
->Much of the nuclear weapons complex was constructed more than 30 years ago , and many facilities are approaching the end of their useful lives .
->Full funding for the modernization and environmental cleanup effort will probably be difficult to achieve , in view of competition with other programs .
The report said that while the budget for fiscal 1990 will be `` generally consistent '' with the plan , accomplishing all recommendations on schedule probably will require more resources than are now expected to be available in subsequent years .
->``Major environmental restoration '' will be required at the Rocky Flats Plant near Denver , the Hanford Reservation near Richland , Wash. , and the Feed Materials Production Center in Fernald , Ohio , when nuclear weapons activities there are either relocated or terminated .
As an interim measure , certain upgrade steps will be required at the Rocky Flats Plant to maintain operations `` at an acceptable level of risk '' while the relocated facilities are being constructed .
->New production reactors are slated for the Savannah River Plant and the Idaho National Engineering Laboratory .
DOE has proposed building a heavy water reactor at Savannah River and a gas->cooled reactor at the Idaho facility .
->Both the administration and Congress recognize the need for the modernization and cleanup program , and `` expeditious implementation '' of the proposed plan is recommended , the report summary said .
