Cuban President Fidel Castro on Wednesday said the first of 3,000 Cuban troops in Angola will return home Tuesday , the official Prensa Latina news agency reported .
Castro also warned that a plan to cut the number of U.N. peacekeeping troops in neighboring Namibia would permit South Africa to install a puppet government in that country , also known as South-West Africa .
`` We will fulfill our obligations before the first of April , '' Castro said in a dispatch monitored in Mexico City .
He was referring to the deadline for the pullout of the first 3,000 Cuban troops from Angola under a U.S.-brokered peace accord .
Angola , Cuba and South Africa signed a treaty Dec. 22 calling for the withdrawal of the 50,000-strong Cuban force from Angola within 30 months , half of them by Nov. 1 .
Castro said a proposal to reduce the size of a U.N. peacekeeping force in Namibia from 7,500 to 3,000 troops would enable South Africa to maintain a powerbroker 's role in Namibia and complicate the Cuban pullout from Angola .
`` Difficulties have arisen '' in enacting the accord `` for the independence of Namibia , for which SWAPO has fought many years , spilling the blood of many of its combatants , '' Castro said , referring to the acronym for the South-West African Peoples Organization nationalist movement .
`` Taking into account the growth of the South African forces ... in Namibia , the reduced number of ( U.N. ) troops could not guarantee these goals and would benefit South African plans to install a titular government in the country , '' Castro declared .
He said Cuba had made its concerns known to the U.N. Security Council .
Castro 's complaints echoed those made by Sam Nujoma , leader of SWAPO , earlier Wednesday in Havana , the Cuban capital .
Castro suggested that other African nations , including Nigeria , Ethiopia and Tanzania , contribute troops to the U.N. force , Prensa Latina said .
Cuba sent troops to Angola in 1975 to help the Marxist government fight invading South African troops and U.S.-backed rebels of the right-wing National Union of the Total Independence of Angola , called UNITA .
