The Congressional Budget Office says slashing next year 's federal deficit is going to be a more formidable job than Reagan administration officials and aides to President-elect Bush realize .
The budget office , in a report released Wednesday , said the fiscal 1990 deficit will be $141 billion unless new taxes or spending cuts are instituted .
The Reagan administration has estimated next year 's red ink at a more manageable $127 billion .
The numbers presented by the non-partisan congressional agency , if accurate , would make it even more difficult for Bush and Congress to meet the Gramm-Rudman balanced budget law 's 1990 deficit target of $100 billion .
Under that law , if the government fails to come within $10 billion of the deficit target , spending cuts are automatically triggered in a range of domestic and defense programs until the goal is achieved .
Most lawmakers say the resulting reductions in federal services would be so unpopular with the public that this path is politically unfeasible .
The Gramm-Rudman law states that the administration 's deficit forecast - not the one made by CB0 - determines whether the automatic cuts would be necessary .
But Congress relies on the CBO figures as a guideline in its budget work .
`` Both the Congress and the president , if those projections were way off , will face the same consequences , '' new House Budget Committee Chairman Leon Panetta , D-Calif. , said of the administration 's more optimistic forecast .
If CBO is correct , Bush and lawmakers will have to find $41 billion in deficit reductions to meet the Gramm-Rudman target .
Even if the administration 's forecast is accurate , many legislators have said that Bush 's repeated campaign promises to forego new taxes will make it hard to avoid Gramm-Rudman 's automatic cuts .
On Monday , 11 days before he leaves office , President Reagan will present Congress with a $1.2 trillion budget for fiscal 1990 , which begins Oct. 1 .
Administration officials have said Reagan found enough savings to produce a $92.5 billion deficit , well within the Gramm-Rudman goal .
Reagan has said if his cuts are made , the budget will be balanced by 1993 , the same year the Gramm-Rudman law requires the elimination of the deficit .
The CBO report said , however , that without savings , 1993 will see $129 billion in red ink .
Reagan 's spending plan is not binding , and Bush and lawmakers will virtually have to start all over again in their efforts to forge a 1990 spending blueprint .
Last year 's deficit was $155 billion , and CBO thinks it will again be that large for fiscal 1989 .
The CBO raised its deficit projections from a forecast last August by $7 billion for the current fiscal year and $5 billion for fiscal 1990 .
The key reason: the cost of shoring up the ailing savings and loan industry .
The CBO deficit report was based on projections that the economy would continue a slow but steady growth of 2.2 percent in 1990 and 1991 and 2.3 percent in each of the next two years , with unemployment holding steady , inflation increasing slightly next year and interest rates gradually declining .
