At one time , U.S. diplomats got into hot water if they clinked teacups with members of the PLO , but now the State Department has switched signals .
State Department spokeswoman Phyllis Oakley confirmed Thursday that American officials around the world have been given the green light to mix with Palestine Liberation Organization representatives - but strictly on an informal basis .
`` There have been instructions that have allowed people in social settings to respond socially to introductions , '' Mrs. Oakley said .
The spokeswoman emphasized the new policy for formal contacts between the United States and the Palestinian group still stands: U.S. Ambassador to Tunisia , Robert H. Pelletreau , is the only person authorized to conduct America 's diplomatic dialogue with the PLO .
`` The one channel for communication with the PLO officially remains our ambassador in Tunis , '' Mrs. Oakley said .
The spokeswoman declined to outline the exact `` diplomatic ... niceties of teacups and handshakes , '' but said `` people may respond socially in a setting .
If you 're introduced , there may be the exchange of courtesies . ''
`` These are not to be construed as official contacts , '' she said , adding it was expected such meetings might occur at diplomatic receptions or `` in a group at a large party , if people meet or are introduced . ''
One State Department official , who spoke on condition of anonymity , said the new policy came about after President Reagan 's historic decision in mid-December to reverse the policy of refusing to deal with members of the organization , long shunned as a band of terrorists .
Reagan said PLO Chairman Yasser Arafat had met U.S. demands by renouncing terrorism and recognizing Israel 's right to exist .
Two days after Secretary of State George Shultz announced Reagan 's decision to drop the 13-year ban on contacts with the PLO , Pelletreau met for an hour and 40 minutes with a PLO delegation in Tunis , where the organization has its headquarters .
`` Suddenly , ambassadors wanted to know what to do if they got calls from a PLO representative , saying , ` I 've been told we can have a dialogue , when can we meet ? ' '' the official said .
He said a message was sent to all U.S. embassies as a `` guideline for people about what they can and cannot do. ... It 's just normal courtesy . ''
`` It means no one will go out of their way to set up a meeting , but if you 're in a social setting and a PLO official walks up to you , of course you 're not going to walk away , '' he said .
`` Now you can have a social conversation . ''
The official stressed that the change was a subtle one .
`` We have n't recognized the PLO , we have n't recognized a Palestinian state , '' he said .
Even so , any contact is considered sensitive .
In 1979 , U.N. Ambassador Andrew Young resigned his post amid controversy over an unauthorized meeting he held with a PLO representative in a Manhattan apartment .
