The nation 's cities expect a more `` mature relationship '' with the federal government under George Bush than they have had during the Reagan era , the incoming president of the National League of Cities says .
Using a parent-child analogy to discuss how cities have fared in their dealings with the federal government , Phoenix Mayor Terry Goddard told a National Press Club luncheon on Thursday:  `` During the sixties and seventies we had a pampered childhood. ... And then very abruptly at the beginning of the eighties , we were orphaned. ... We were thrown out in the storm and we were told to fend for ourselves . ''
`` We 're looking for a new relationship , a mature relationship , one that binds two powerful entities , the federal government and local government into a common purpose , '' and partnership said Goddard , who was recently elected the league 's president .
The league is the nation 's largest and oldest organization representing towns and cities .
Although he said the cities had learned to cope , stretch resources and survive their `` Oliver Twist '' adolescent period without Washington , the 41-year-old Goddard said municipalities face problems like the spread of drugs , lack of affordable housing , and decaying infrastructure and environment .
`` There is serious trouble in urban America , '' he said .
Goddard said the problems of cities are often ignored because they 're dull and gradual .
He said they are n't noticed until `` after a system fails , after a building collapses or a bridge falls through . ''
But he said the new administration should focus on what can be done to prevent catastrophe before it happens .
Goddard met Thursday afternoon with Jack Kemp , Bush 's nominee to head the Department of Housing and Urban Development , where he presented the league 's proposal for six initiatives for the Bush administration and the 101st Congress to help tackle urban problems .
The proposal includes establishing a council of urban advisers , developing a comprehensive national housing policy , a national policy on children and families and a new federal surface transportation policy , and invigorating federal support for urban research .
Goddard said cities recognize the federal deficit problem and do n't seek a return to their pampered days , `` but we do need a positive administration response , one which is willing to use national leadership and coordination to help us save money and add a sense of direction . ''
Goddard said Bush could demonstrate a commitment to a partnership with cities if he consults local officials , sets up a mechanism to consider the impact of agencies ' actions and regulations on municipalities , evaluates approaches cities have found successful in dealing with their problems and does n't rule out spending new funds in critical areas .
That done , `` We pledge to help the president-elect become the best urban president this country has known , '' said Goddard .
