Inmates at the Youthful Correctional Offender Institution rioted for about two hours Friday , but corrections officers and police tactical units stayed on overnight , authorities said .
Three inmates and one corrections officer were injured in the uprising and there was `` minimal damage '' to the lockup said Kathy Drake , a spokeswoman for the Department of Corrections in Atlanta .
Ms. Drake said she did not know what set off the disturbance or how many inmates were involved .
Despite the name of the facility , the average age of the 970 inmates at the prison is 24 , according to Ms. Drake .
Ms. Drake said the injured officer , who was not identified , broke his hand , apparently by slipping and falling .
The injury , she said , `` was not in contact with an inmate . ''
She did not have details of the inmates ' injuries .
Five tactical units of 18 officers each were called in to help stop the uprising , which began about 4:45 p.m. , apparently in sympathy with a disturbance at a nearby state prison earlier this week .
The riot , which broke out around 4:45 p.m. with inmates damaging and breaking property , Ms. Drake said .
The crowd control officers used tear gas to halt the uprising in the Kemper Building , one of three units comprising the lockup , Ms. Drake said .
`` When they did ( use tear gas ), they immediately began to quiet down .
It then spilled over into the Holly Building ( a second unit ), '' she said .
Tear gas was not used in the second unit , because the situation there was not as severe , Ms. Drake said .
`` There was no damage done .
It was mostly a lot of yelling , a lot of cussing , '' she said .
Because the tear gas spread beyond the Kemper Building , about 100 inmates could not be returned immediately to their cells , and were held in a yard until the gas clears , Ms. Drake said .
Two tactical units from Milledgeville , in central Georgia about 25 miles east of Macon , and one from Reidsville remained on the scene , Ms. Drake said , adding that the Department of Corrections would begin an internal investigation into the disturbance .
If the inmates who were responsible are identified , they would be segregated from the rest of the prison population and would face administrative charges , she said .
Friday 's uprising marked the second disturbance at a Georgia prison this week .
On Tuesday , inmates rioted at Rivers Correctional Institution in Milledgeville , an incident officials called the most serious in the state in 10 years .
More than 900 inmates participated in the earlier incident , with three officers and three inmates injured and $300,000 in damage reported .
