First lady Nancy Reagan was saluted Monday night for her sense of style and her contribution to the American fashion industry .
Mrs. Reagan was presented with a Lifetime Achievement Award by the Council of Fashion Designers of America at its eighth annual awards ceremony , held at the Metropolitan Museum of Art .
`` There are many pluses and minuses to being in the White House .
One of the pluses is trying to help an industry that is one of the most important in our country and I think the American fashion designers are the best , '' said the first lady , who was wearing a brilliant red floor-length gown designed by Oscar de la Renta .
`` And when I found myself in the position to make others aware of that , or at least try to , I was delighted to do so , '' she added .
Broadcaster Barbara Walters , in presenting the award to Mrs. Reagan , said the first lady and the president , during his eight years in office , `` gave us pride , gave us hope , gave us style ... that intriguing , all-encompassing word that says so much .
Style .
Presence .
A sense of beauty .
... Nancy Reagan has style . ''
Prior to the awards ceremony , de la Renta , president of the council , said of Mrs. Reagan: `` I think she put American fashion on the pedestal where it belongs and brought elegance back to American fashion . ''
Designer Donna Karan said of Mrs. Reagan: `` The contribution to fashion she has made goes beyond her clothing to her sense of sophistication , caring and elegance as first lady of the United States . ''
Calvin Klein , accompanied by his wife Kelly , said: `` She has shown how women can look so well-groomed , so attractive and so American . ''
Mrs. Reagan has been criticized for borrowing much of her high-priced wardrobe while living at the White House -- a practice critics said amounted to free advertising for the designers whose clothes she wore .
But Ms. Walters said she thought a first lady should be `` encouraged to borrow '' because it `` stimulates American industry . ''
Her comment caused the 500 ceremony guests to applaud vigorously .
Mrs. Reagan had worn the de la Renta gown she wore to the ceremony on at least three other occasions , said Wendy Toler , a spokeswoman for the first lady .
Also among those recognized at the ceremony was designer Geoffrey Beene , who was saluted for making `` fashion as art . ''
Performer Liza Minelli , one of many women attending the ceremony who dressed in Mrs. Reagan 's favorite color , red , presented the Perry Ellis award for new fashion talent to Isaac Mizrahi , whom she called `` a brilliant and startling talent . ''
Ms. Minelli wore a floor-length gown with a leg-revealing slit designed by Mizrahi .
Actress Audrey Hepburn , wearing a red gown designed by Givenchy , presented a Lifetime Achievement Award to photographer Richard Avedon , for his `` pictorial contribution to American fashion and his photographic reportage of historical events . ''
Bill Robinson received the award for menswear design .
Nina Hyde , fashion editor of The Washington Post , was recognized for her reporting on American fashion .
Karl Lagerfeld , designer for the house of Chanel , received a special award for his international fashion influence .
Grace Mirabella , former editor-in-chief of Vogue magazine , was recognized for her promotion of American fashion in the media .
Judith Peabody , a member of the board of directors of the Gay Men 's Health Crisis Inc. , received the council 's special humanitarian award .
