President Reagan 's submission today of his $1.15 trillion federal budget for fiscal 1990 triggers a work schedule that is specified by law , cited with reverence by lawmakers and then routinely ignored .
This year should be no different .
The law calls for Congress to have completed work on the spending plan by April 15 .
In addition , all 13 appropriations bills that finance the federal government are supposed to be in place by the Oct. 1 start of the new fiscal year .
But that rarely happens , and ingredients for delay abound this year .
Congress will be treating Reagan 's proposal as largely inconsequential and waiting for a new plan from President-elect Bush after his inauguration .
The House Budget Committee is n't even planning any hearings on Reagan 's blueprint and will wait instead until it receives something from Bush .
In addition , Bush 's repeated pledges to avoid new taxes puts him in direct conflict with many congressional leaders who say the additional revenues will be unavoidable .
`` There probably has n't been a year in the last five where the likelihood of keeping to the budget schedule is less likely , '' says Stanley E. Collender , the Washington-based director of federal budget policy for the accounting firm of Price Waterhouse .
This has n't stopped top members of Congress from their usual pledges to move quickly on the budget .
Last Monday , Congress ' first day in session , House Speaker Jim Wright , D-Texas , set a goal of meeting budget deadlines and said , `` So far as the speaker can influence the schedule , we shall perform our work on time . ''
And new Senate Budget Committee Chairman Jim Sasser , D-Tenn. , expressed the same desire in a telephone interview last week , adding that the delay caused by the presidential transition `` does n't waive the provisions of the law '' setting the budget work schedule .
But history shows that fiscal and political crises , not timetables , govern the budget process .
Budget deadlines set by law come and go with no real consequences if they are missed .
But three key fiscal events are scheduled to occur roughly simultaneously this fall and are likely to spur action in what Collender , borrowing from the language of New Age adherents , calls `` the political equivalent of the harmonic convergence . ''
Sometime this August or September , the government is expected to reach its debt ceiling of $2.8 trillion , meaning that legislation will be needed for it to be able to borrow more money .
At the same time , if there is no budget agreement between Congress and the White House , the mechanism will begin that ultimately triggers the dreaded automatic spending slashes required under the Gramm-Rudman balanced budget law .
Those cuts -- which are seen by most people as draconian -- would take effect Oct. 1 .
In addition , September is the last month of the fiscal year .
Some sort of legislation that provides money must be in place by Oct. 1 or the government cannot function .
Stalemates are common when it comes to the budget because the blueprint is the most basic statement of the government 's priorities .
It not only perpetually creates institutional struggles between the executive and legislative branches , but it is a battleground for Democrats and Republicans positioning themselves for future elections .
Last year was unusual for its budget harmony because most of the crucial decisions were made at a summit among Reagan administration officials and congressional leaders shortly after the October 1987 stock market crash .
It was the first year in 12 in which all 13 spending bills were finished by Oct. 1 .
In 1987 , spending legislation was not completed until nearly Christmas , three months into the fiscal year .
