The city manager is on the verge of flipping a switch that will send electricity flowing through city-owned power lines , a change he says will save money for residents of this northern Ohio town .
But officials for the Toledo Edison Co. , which now supplies electricity to the town 's 5,600 residents , say a municipal power system will be unreliable and electric rates will eventually increase and surpass their rates .
City Manager Nelson Summit admits that the Clyde Light and Power Co. is a gamble .
`` What it boiled down to was I felt there was a better way to provide electricity .
It turned out that it is going to be cheaper and rates will get a lot better in the future , '' Summit said in a recent interview .
But Toledo Edison is putting up a fight .
It filed a lawsuit last month after the city refused to start negotiating the renewal of the private company 's franchise to serve the city .
The contract expires in June 1990 .
Toledo Edison wants to force Clyde to explain to the state Public Utilities Commission why the company should not be allowed to compete with the new municipal system in Clyde , about 30 miles southeast of Toledo .
Toledo Edison will lose about $7 million to $8 million annually in revenues if the franchise is not renewed , said Mark Everhart , general manager of the utility 's eastern district .
The utility has 275,000 customers in northwestern Ohio .
`` Losing Clyde is kind of like cutting the heart out of a distribution system , '' he said .
The conversion to a city-owned system had its beginnings five years ago when Summit moved to Clyde and saw his electric bills double .
Voters in November 1987 approved a $10 million bond issue to set up the utility company .
Early last year , the city agreed to buy power wholesale from the Canton-based Ohio Power Co. at 3.1 cents per kilowatt hour .
The city wanted to buy Toledo Edison 's distribution system , but the company 's selling price of $30 million was too high , Summit said .
Now , Clyde is building a new substation , distribution and transmission lines .
Its first customer , a Whirlpool Corp. plant , is expected to be on line in early March , Summit said .
The City Council recently set rates for the new system at 7 cents per kilowatt hour .
The current rate is 9.5 cents and the average household pays $52 a month .
That 's expected to drop to $39 .
More than 80 Ohio communities have municipal electric systems , most buying power wholesale from utilities , but no municipal system has been set up since the early 1900s .
Clyde 's operation is being closely watched by other Ohio municipalities interested in cutting electric rates .
`` There is no doubt about it , a precedent has already been set and Toledo Edison is worried , '' Summit said .
But there are several inherent problems with municipal power systems , Everhart said .
In coming years , some cities may have trouble buying power wholesale because supplies will diminish , the utility company official said .
`` A no-frill utility company will work fine until the wind blows hard , until there is a major accident and until something goes wrong .
And then all of a sudden , you are left holding the bag , '' said Everhart .
