A Belfast-bound jetliner carrying 126 people crashed beside a highway in central England on Sunday and broke into pieces , killing at least 37 people and injuring 76 , officials said .
The airline said the crash was caused by engine failure and ruled out sabotage .
The British Midland Airways Boeing 737-400 was en route from London 's Heathrow Airport to Northern Ireland when it developed engine trouble , the Civil Aviation Authority said .
The jet attempted to land at East Midlands Airport near Nottingham , about 100 miles north of London , but undershot the runway by a half-mile and crashed alongside a highway , smashed into an embankment and broke apart , police said .
Witnesses reported seeing an engine in flames as the aircraft came in low , dropping bits of debris and shearing off treetops as it careened toward the highway .
Cars swerved to avoid the hulk and there were a few minor injuries from auto collisions , police said .
`` We believe that 37 people have died as a result of this accident , but there are still some people in the wreckage , '' Leicestershire Assistant Chief Constable Tony Butler told a news conference .
He said he did not know whether the trapped people were dead or alive .
It was also not certain that all 37 were aboard the plane , since police reported there may have been casualties in cars on the highway .
After nearly eight hours of rescue efforts at the edge of England 's busiest north-south highway , one of the people aboard was still trapped alive in the wreckage and two bodies awaited recovery , the Leicestershire Ambulance Service said .
Police in the county of Derbyshire reported several bodies scattered on each side of the highway .
Two nearby hospitals reported a total of 76 people injured .
`` All of them seemed to have smashed ankles and legs , and with a lot , their faces were badly damaged too , '' said Joe Weston-Webb , 50 , who lives in the nearby village of Sutton Bonningale and was among the first on the scene .
He helped rescue several people and saw many bodies in the wreckage .
`` It seems a miracle that any one got out alive though , and I ca n't believe that it all did n't go up in flames .
It was horrendous . ''
The plane , a new aircraft that only had been in service for three months , was carrying 118 passengers and eight crew , the airline said .
The crash was the second major air tragedy in Britain in three weeks .
On Dec. 21 , a Pan Am Boeing 747 bound for New York blew up over Lockerbie , Scotland , killing all 259 people on board and 11 on the ground .
That jet had also left Heathrow .
A bomb was blamed for the crash .
The flight Sunday took off from Heathrow Airport at 7:52 p.m .
and its engine caught fire 10 minutes later , the Department of Transport said .
The pilot told the control tower he had the engine fire under control , but when the plane was still one to two miles out , `` it was clear that there would be an accident , '' airport official Michael Cowan told a news conference .
` As the plane approached the control tower it was apparent it was too low , '' he said .
Airline executive Colin Roberts told relatives at Belfast Airport , `` There was absolutely no question of sabotage and there was nothing to indicate that whatsoever . ''
The accident was caused by a technical fault in one of the engines of the new plane , which had made seven flights on the London-Belfast route , he said .
The weather was reported good .
The 737 crashed at about 8:30 p.m. ( 3:30 p.m. EST ) about a mile outside the village of Kegworth , Inspector Neville Cotterill of the Leicestershire police said .
The tail section was embedded in the ground and the fuselage broke into several parts spread over fields , Cotterill told The Associated Press .
But he added that no cars were known to have been hit as the plane thundered alongside the M1 , England 's main north-south highway .
The highway was closed as dozens of ambulances and fire engines converged on the scene .
Cries for help could be heard from inside the fuselage .
Personal belongings littered the highway .
Rescuers dug steps into the embankment and formed a human chain from the wreckage to the ambulances .
They flattened trees and hacked open the fuselage .
The cockpit with a large chunk of fuselage came to rest in thick brambles and trees near the top of the embankment .
The pilot , Capt .
Kevin Hunt , was hospitalized with multiple injuries , British Midland said .
A local vicar , the Rev. Michael Brandon , said he held a passenger 's hand and whispered the Lord 's Prayer to him as he died .
`` It was very dignified and peaceful .
There is not a lot more you can do in a situation like this , '' he said .
The crippled jet roared over 16-year-old Samantha Phelby 's house just before it hit the ground .
`` We looked outside as it got louder and as it was going overhead we saw the left engine still on fire .
Then we heard this pop , which could have been the crash .
Then we heard the fire engines , '' she told Independent Radio News .
Desmond Anderson , who lives 400 yards from the airport 's main runway , said , ` The far side engine was on fire , backfiring and roaring away ... An Automobile Association manager , John McKnight , said: `` There are still people trapped and work is going on to free them .
From the reports I have had there is a terrific amount of wreckage .
It 's a hell of a mess . ''
British Midland chairman Michael Bishop said the pilot reported `` severe vibrations in one of the engines '' and asked clearance for an emergency landing at the airport .
Bishop said the company had taken delivery of the plane only 12 weeks ago .
Civil Aviation Authority spokeswoman Ann Noonan said the pilot reported problems in his No. 2 engine and was having trouble climbing .
The two-engined aircraft disappeared off ground control radar screens at 8:15 p.m .
The Boeing 737-400 is a version of the Boeing 737 with a longer fuselage and can carry 146 passengers .
It was introduced last year .
