Political parties are struggling to emerge in this British colony but face the formidable hurdles of apathy , public distrust and a wary Communist China , which gains sovereignty over the territory in 1997 .
Attempts to form the groups comes as Britain prepares to hold Hong Kong 's first general legislative elections and China appears to have reluctantly dropped its opposition to such activity .
The organizations will be different from Western-style political parties because they will not be able to form a sovereign government .
Instead , they will be limited to trying to influence the outgoing British rulers and pursuing whatever local power Beijing permits under the `` high degree of autonomy '' it promises for this capitalist enclave after 1997 .
`` The administration of Hong Kong will be in the hands of Hong Kong people , so in that sense we still have a lot of power , '' said Yeung Sum , chairman of Meeting Point , a pressure group of about 300 members that views itself as a future party .
In recent weeks , businessman Stephen Cheong and lawyer Martin Lee , both members of the colony 's Legislative Council , have announced plans to form political parties .
Councilor Maria Tam 's Progressive Hong Kong Society also is mentioned as an emerging party .
Those groups are expected to participate in general elections to be held in 1991 for 10 of 56 seats on the council , which is primarily a forum to debate policy made by the British governor and his advisers .
The council now consists of government officials , government appointees and representatives of interest groups and local advisory boards .
The 1991 elections `` will be run on party lines , I 'm quite sure , '' said Joseph Y.S. Cheng , a political scientist at the Chinese University of Hong Kong .
But the groups will face huge problems in gathering support from Hong Kong 's 5.7 million people , who traditionally distrust political parties .
Families who fled to the coastal enclave blame China 's myriad 20th century woes on both the Communists and Nationalists , who moved to Taiwan after the 1949 revolution .
Both parties operate unofficially in Hong Kong .
`` People in Hong Kong feel very comfortable with the status quo , and they are afraid of political activities , political confrontation , '' Cheng said .
Yeung acknowledged that Meeting Point had not clearly declared itself a political party for so long because `` all through the years , people ( have been ) skeptical of the label . ''
Cheong rejects the `` party '' label for his new group .
Political scientist Peter Harris of the University of Hong Kong believes the groups will have trouble winning broad backing .
He said `` the mass of the Hong Kong people are more interested ... in getting the kids to school .
Their understanding of issues is still in a very inchoate stage . ''
Attempts by civic leaders three years ago to form political parties stalled not from apathy but because of China 's opposition , according to Lee .
That stance appears to have softened , however , with the onset of legislative elections that China has promised will continue after 1997 .
Xu Jiatun , China 's main representative in Hong Kong , said early this month that the new constitution being drafted for the territory effectively allows political parties .
Many of the emerging political groups have not clearly stated an ideology and may be identified primarily by the personality of their leaders .
Some of those leaders may seek to become Hong Kong 's first chief executive , which will be the top local post after the British leave .
Cheong said his group will call for stability and only gradual political change , while Lee is the territory 's most vocal advocate of sweeping democratic reform .
Three-year-old Meeting Point 's goals include a high degree of self administration for the territory after 1997 , a central social security fund and more education subsidies , Yeung said .
Lee believes the major issue dividing the parties will be whether they speak primarily for Beijing or Hong Kong interests .
One big question is whether the Chinese Communist Party in Hong Kong , which now works behind the scenes , will go above ground to openly participate in elections .
`` That would frighten the industrialists away , immediately , '' said Lee .
Despite the growing activity of local political groups , Harris sees little hope for them to wield real power , noting that authoritarian Communist countries such as China do not accept challenges to their rule .
