The landmark Sheraton Palace Hotel , a home away from home for six presidents and armies of celebrities since 1875 , has closed for the first time since the great earthquake of 1906 for a $60 million , 18-month renovation .
`` It 's very strange .
It 's very lonely , '' Donald Timbie , the hotel 's general manager and vice president , said Monday as the hotel shut down .
The quake , which destroyed much of the city , triggered a fire which gutted the original , seven-story hotel .
But 12-foot-thick brick walls saved the shell and it was rebuilt to its current nine stories and reopened Dec. 16 , 1909 , with other alterations in 1915 , 1919 and 1925 .
Tenor Enrico Caruso was a guest as the temblor struck .
He was tossed from his bed and vowed , `` I will never set foot in San Francisco again . ''
`` Actually , the earthquake only destroyed 8 percent of the structure , '' said Jim Kilroy , the hotel 's director of marketing .
`` The fire did the rest . ''
The hotel has been host to Presidents Ulysses S. Grant , William Howard Taft , Theodore Roosevelt , Franklin D. Roosevelt and Harry Truman .
Warren G. Harding died there , in room 8064 on Aug. 2 , 1923 .
Other notables who stayed at the Palace include Mark Twain , Oscar Wilde , Charles Lindberg , Amelia Earhart , Charlie Chaplin , Nikita Khrushchev and Winston Churchill .
President Woodrow Wilson gave his famous League of Nations speech there , and the Garden Court held the official banquet honoring the opening session of the United Nations .
King David Kalakaua of Hawaii , the last of the island 's monarchs , died at the Palace on Jan. 20 , 1891 .
The hotel 's exterior will not be altered .
Neither will the Garden Court , a 9,350-square-foot restaurant originally built as a carriage entrance .
It was declared a city landmark in 1969 and the only work there will involve a clean-up and a change in color scheme .
The last luncheon was held in the court Monday .
The San Francisco Opera Guild event drew about 12 people who sat at one table , dwarfed by the huge room that features an arching dome of iridescent glass .
The Market Street hotel , which has 525 guest rooms and 60 suites , will add a swimming pool and health spa , along with about 5,000 square feet of meeting space .
Market Street , which begins near San Francisco Bay and runs through the heart of the city 's business district , has undergone a recent revival .
The repaving and renovation of six downtown blocks was completed late last year , and the opening last October of a lavish new Nordstrom department store a few blocks from the hotel has attracted visitors to the area .
