On the sidelines of the world chemical weapons conference , experts say bleakly no headway has been made on the most worrisome threat: keeping the chemicals away from terrorists or leaders bent on genocide .
Sentiment aside , they say , poison gas works and it is nearly impossible to control its components without energetic , voluntary action by governments and private industry .
At the same time , they add , many small nations refuse to ban such weapons while neighbors have atomic bombs , the way a streetwise youth carries a switch-blade because of bullies down the block .
Few technicians among the 151 delegations attending the five-day Paris conference wanted to be named , leaving the limelight to statesmen drafting a declaration against producing and using chemical or biological weapons .
A European specialist summed up the mood: `` This conference is one thing .
Controlling the stuff is another .
You have to conclude that chemical weapons won the war for Iraq .
That sends a very strong negative message . ''
Iraq acknowledged using poison gas in its eight-year war with Iraq , in which a cease-fire was reached Aug. 20 .
An American expert said many Third World military strategists are seeking advice from Iraq , which he said had five years of experience with mustard gas and nerve gas .
Another U.S. specialist said gas and biological agents would remain effective against `` inconvenient minorities '' even if nations could be kept from using them outside their borders .
Iraq has been accused of using poison gas against rebellious Kurds .
Terrorists could wreak havoc with small amounts of nerve agents , without complex delivery systems .
Max Friedersdorf , U.S. envoy to the Geneva disarmament talks , agreed in an interview that a gulf exists between what probably will be negotiated and what can be applied .
`` There is a technical gap , and 100 percent verification ... is almost impossible , but that does n't mean we should not continue , '' he said .
Richard Perle , the former senior Defense Department official involved in negotiations , went further in a telephone interview from Washington .
`` In this case , 100 percent non-verification is the fact , '' he said .
`` You cannot control this . ''
Perle and most experts agreed the only effective measure is to stop companies from exporting essential chemicals or helping other countries make weapons .
Although some poison gases are easy to make , they say , mass production and accurate delivery systems require sophisticated assistance .
`` You cannot let yourself be put off by the hand thrower-uppers , '' one American delegate said .
`` Of course it is hard , but the horse is not all the way out of the barn .
We have to do this fast . ''
U.S. and West German specialists estimated 20 to 25 companies regularly sell chemicals to Third World countries making deadly agents , and about another 300 have made sales in recent years .
They said most of the companies were West German .
The only control now is the informal Australia Suppliers Group , representatives of 19 nations who meet regularly in Paris to discuss possible dangerous sales by private suppliers .
`` We have to rely on each country to provide information and take action , '' said a delegate who regularly attends those meetings .
`` Our effect is limited . ''
Even with the best of political will it would take two to three years to agree on a treaty and 10 more to eliminate chemical weapons , he said , and `` that is a long time to keep up political pressure . ''
West German authorities say they want to prevent dangerous exports but are hampered by lack of an international code .
Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher , addressing the conference , appealed for a ban on chemical weapons combined with mandatory inspections on 48 hours notice in cases of suspicion .
U.S. negotiators first suggested such challenge inspections in 1984 , Perle said , but subsequent study showed that , `` in a matter of days , even hours , all evidence can be removed . ''
He added , referring to Libyan leader Col. Moammar Gadhafi: `` Even if an accord were reached for investigators to leave the moment they had a suspicion , who in their right mind would believe that someone like Colonel Gadhafi would allow it to happen ? ''
The United States accuses Libya of building a chemical weapons plant with the help of a West Germany company .
Libya says it is a pharmaceutical factory .
Perle said the West Germans should police their own exporters .
`` They allow their companies to get involved in this , cover it up and go around lecturing us , '' he said .
Another American delegate commented: `` It is not an accident that people as efficient as the Germans cannot control these people . ''
