Astronomers have spotted a star as it devoured its companion orb , and perhaps solved a celestial mystery .
Scientists have long argued about how some superdense stars called pulsars could get themselves spinning hundreds of times a second .
The question may now be answered by the discovery of a black widow binary -- a star that like the spider uses its companion and then destroys it .
If current theories are correct , the star represents a celestial missing link , a bridge between fast-spinning stars that have mates and those that do not .
The combination of the star and its companion , labeled PSR 1957-20 in astronomers ' shorthand , was detected last spring by Andrew Fruchter of the Carnegie Institution in Washington .
At a meeting Monday of the American Astronomical Society , scientists described the significance of the find in understanding the life and death of the stars .
The duo is made up of a pulsar , an incredibly dense dead star that transmits rhythmic beats of radar .
It is orbited by a much larger ordinary star known as a brown dwarf .
Astronomers have evidence that the pulsar is transmitting a powerful blast of energy that is literally blowing its companion away .
They believe this is the late phase of a long , one-sided relationship between the two in which the pulsar steals matter from its mate to boost its speed , then turns on it with a blaze of atomic particles .
`` The companion is being destroyed , '' said Frederic A. Rasio of Cornell University .
`` It is constantly losing matter .
Eventually it could completely disappear . ''
The pulsar is one of six known pulsars that spin extremely rapidly .
The newly discovered pair is important because they seem to help explain how they get to spin so fast .
`` It offers a missing link between two classes of objects , '' said Steve Maran of NASA 's Goddard Space Flight Center .
`` That 's why astronomers are so excited . ''
A pulsar is the collapsed remains of a large star that has exploded in a spectacular disaster called a supernova .
Pulsars emit no light , but broadcast twin rotating beams of radar , like lighthouses in the sky .
While a pulsar is only 14 miles across , its mass is 50 percent greater than the sun .
One teaspoon of pulsar matter weighs billions of tons .
Most pulsars spin about once a second and are slowing down .
However , the newly discovered one spins about 600 times a second .
Astronomers theorize that such fast-moving pulsars speed up by stealing a stream of matter from a companion star .
The companion `` spins up the pulsar like a top , '' said Fruchter .
However , astronomers have noticed while some of these fast-spinning pulsars have companions , others do not .
`` People wondered , ` If you spin up the pulsar with a companion , where is the companion ? ' '' said Fruchter .
`` This may explain that .
The pulsar has evaporated the companion . ''
In the newly spotted couple , the companion is close to the pulsar , a distance of only 2 { times the sun 's diameter .
Yet it is being bombarded with atomic particles 5,000 times more intense than the sun .
Astronomers were able to study the pair because the companion regularly eclipses the pulsar .
The companion revolves around the pulsar once every nine hours , and each time it blocks out the pulsar 's radar beam for about 50 minutes .
`` This is the only one ( mate-eating pulsar ) that we have seen in the galaxy , '' said E. Sterl Phinney of the California Institute of Technology .
`` But there is the exciting possibility that there will be many more . ''
