Liberace 's ex-lover testified Tuesday that a convicted drug dealer spoke of a `` bloody mess '' after a 1981 quadruple murder and said , `` The whole thing got out of hand . ''
Scott Thorson said defendant Eddie Nash also told him he was going to teach a lesson to a group of people who had robbed him , saying , `` I 'll have these people on their knees . ''
Nash , 59 , whose real name is Adel Nasrallah , and his bodyguard Gregory Diles , 40 , are charged with the Laurel Canyon slayings in which sex-film star John Holmes once was tried and acquitted .
Witnesses at the current preliminary hearing said Nash was robbed of cash , drugs and jewelry by two subsequent murder victims .
Witness David Lind , who participated in the robbery , said Nash fell to his knees and asked for time to pray , assuming he would be killed .
Scott Thorson , 29 , who was Liberace 's companion from 1977 to 1982 , said he became close friends with Nash after he bought cocaine from him in early 1981 .
He said he wound up living at Nash 's house when Liberace evicted him in 1982 .
At the end of June 1981 , Thorson recalled , he went to Nash 's house to buy cocaine .
Soon , he said , Diles appeared with Holmes in tow .
Diles took Holmes into a bedroom , Thorson said , adding he was told to leave but listened outside the door .
`` Eddie ( Nash ) was screaming at the top of his lungs , '' Thorson said .
`` ... He threatened that he would kill John Holmes ' family and he would kill him if he did n't take him to the home of the people who robbed him . ''
Diles and Holmes left and Nash said that he had sent Diles `` to get his property '' Thorson said .
Later , Thorson said , Nash sank into a depression and went on a drug binge .
During one of those sessions , Thorson said Nash confided in him .
`` He discussed ... Wonderland ( the street on which the murders occurred ) and he had gone a little too far , '' said Thorson .
`` He used the term , ` a bloody mess , ' '' said Thorson .
`` He said the whole thing got out of hand . ''
`` Did he say he had the murders done ? ''
asked Deputy District Attorney Dale Davidson .
`` He did n't come right out and say it , '' said Thorson .
`` ... He said they were pinning the murders on him . ''
The victims , Ronald Launius , 37 , Roy DeVerell , 42 , Barbara Richardson , 22 , and Joy Audrey Miller , 46 , were bludgeoned to death on July 1 , 1981 , about two days after Lind said Nash was robbed .
Launius ' wife , Susan , survived the attack but was never able to identify her attacker .
Holmes died of acquired immune deficiency syndrome last March .
Thorson made headlines when he sued Liberace for $12 million claiming the entertainer reneged on a promise to support him for life .
Liberace died of AIDS in 1987 .
