George P. Shultz plans to cancel his last official trip overseas - to a human rights conference in Vienna - unless Greece gives ground in a dispute over how much of Turkey should be covered by an East-West arms control agreement .
A decision by the Secretary of State to stay home also means he would miss a 32nd and final meeting with Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze .
At the root of this uncertainty is an effort by the Greek government to expose more Turkish territory to conventional arms control coverage .
Boundaries have been drawn for conventional arms control negotiations designed to follow the close of the rights conference , but Greece , suspicious of Turkey and fretful about Cyprus , is holding out .
Everyone else in the 16-nation NATO alliance has agreed on the precise expanse of Europe to be covered in the Conventional Stability Talks with the Soviet-led Warsaw Pact to reduce troops , tanks and artillery across the European landscape .
But unless a compromise is struck with Athens and its mercurial prime minister , Andreas Papandreou , the Vienna conference - which makes its decisions by consensus - cannot close and negotiations between NATO and the Warsaw Pact will be put off indefinitely .
The rights conference , which opened in November 1986 , has reviewed compliance with the Helsinki agreement .
The 35-nation accord signed in the Finnish capital in 1975 provided for human rights improvements and a lessening of tensions between East and West .
The arms control talks are covered by the conference because they aim at reducing those tensions .
The end of the Vienna conference would set the stage for the opening within weeks of the arms control talks between NATO and the Warsaw Pact .
The United States and Moscow had agreed in 1983 that the area to be covered by reductions would stretch from the Atlantic to the Ural Mountains in the Soviet Union .
But it took years of negotiations to define the area more exactly .
NATO wanted to include the Caucasus mountain region in the Soviet Union .
The Warsaw Pact wanted the U.S. air base at Incirlik , Turkey , covered , as well .
Turkey , meanwhile , stretches from Europe , the focus of the negotiations , to Asia , which is not part of the mandate .
The Turks are nervous about three of their neighbors , Iran , Syria and Iraq , and have tensions with Greece over Cyprus to the south .
They would like to keep as many men under arms as they can .
The Turkish army invaded Cyprus in 1974 and still holds about one-third of the island where Turkey set up a separate state that only Ankara recognizes as legitimate .
The Greek Cypriots , who are in the majority on the island and have Greece 's support , want the Turks to withdraw .
In Vienna , a deal was struck between Turkey and the Soviet Union .
It excluded a large area along Turkey 's southern coast from the negotiations - thereby guaranteeing that Turkish forces in the area would not be part of any reduction NATO and the Warsaw Pact work out .
NATO went along with the deal , but Greece did not .
Papandreou 's government wanted more of Turkish territory and southern ports included in the arms control negotiations .
Greece 's goal is to reduce Turkish forces facing Cyprus .
The United States is not directly involved in the dispute .
`` We 've always felt the working out should be done by the Soviets and the Turks , '' said a U.S. official , who spoke on condition of anonymity .
But he stressed that the Greeks , who initially accepted the exclusion of an even larger area of Turkey from the negotiations , were at odds with all of NATO .
`` Everybody was taken aback when they changed their position , '' the official said .
There is still some time to reach a settlement before Shultz 's scheduled departure for Vienna on Sunday .
But the time is running short .
