President Reagan wants Congress set aside money for the next wave of military weaponry and increase spending on Star Wars in a defense budget with little chance of winning approval as it is , say congressional leaders and defense experts .
Overall , the two-year budget the Reagan administration released Monday proposes an increase in defense spending by 2 percent above the rate of inflation with $315.2 billion in budget authority for 1990 and $330.89 billion for 1991 .
Outlays - the money to be spent during the 12 months of fiscal 1990 - total $303 billion , including $9.2 billion for Energy Department nuclear weapons and research programs .
Outlays for fiscal 1991 amount to $314.4 billion .
President-elect Bush is expected to amend the Reagan budget after he takes office Jan. 20 .
The vice president has talked about a budget request that matches inflation instead of providing real growth .
If Bush fails to change the budget , Congress will surely do so .
For the past four years , Congress has cut defense spending increases to levels below the rate of inflation .
The reaction from legislators to the latest Reagan budget indicates that this time will be no different .
`` We know one thing about this defense budget , it is n't likely to be approved the way it was submitted - with an increase of 2 percent over and above inflation , '' said Rep. Les Aspin , D-Wis. , chairman of the House Armed Services Committee , in a statement he issued Friday .
`` What we need to know before Congress can go to work is what George Bush wants in his defense budget .
I am eager not only to read the new president 's lips on defense , but also his first defense message to Congress , '' Aspin said .
Sen. John Warner of Virginia , ranking Republican on the Senate Armed Services Committee , said the budget is a `` good foundation , '' but reserved comment until further study .
Among the requests likely to be changed by Congress or Bush are $94.6 million in spending authority in 1990 and $124.3 million the next year for research on a new Navy anti-satellite weapon and elimination of a proposed single-warhead intercontinental ballistic missile , the Midgetman .
The budget also calls for moving into production the new B-2 stealth bomber , the Trident II submarine-launched nuclear missile and a rail-mobile version of the giant MX intercontinental ballistic missile .
`` What worries me is the hasty rush to the next generation of military hardware , '' said Gordon Adams , director of the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities , an independent analysis group .
Congress is likely to question a budget that `` shaves the edges of readiness and sustainability , '' Adams said .
Defense Secretary Frank C. Carlucci said the administration made some hard choices in either canceling or delaying two dozen programs , but the budget will not weaken the nation 's ability to defend itself .
`` The moderate 2 percent real growth rate proposed in this budget is an attempt to steer a sustainable and fiscally responsible course that allows the United States to maintain its current force structure and to acquire the weapons systems necessary to ensure our national security , '' he said .
The budget includes an increase in spending authority on the Strategic Defense Initiative , commonly known as Star Wars , from $4.1 billion in 1989 to $5.9 billion in 1990 and $7 billion in 1991 .
Bush has said he supports Star Wars research , but it remains unclear how quickly he will pursue the program .
Star Wars is a `` softball for cutting , '' according to Adams , who believes the inflated total will give Bush a chance to trim the budget by about $2 billion .
`` SDI is destined to be no more than a research program , '' said John Steinbruner , director of foreign policy studies at the Brookings Institution , a liberal think tank .
The budget plan also requests $500 million to begin shutting down unneeded military bases , reduce the Defense Department 's civilian workforce of 1.1 million by 5,000 people and shift more than two dozen existing weapon programs toward multi-year contracts .
Meanwhile , Reagan asked Congress for a small increase in funding for veterans ' medical care and pensions as he proposed outlays of $29.9 billion for the new Department of Veterans Affairs .
Outlays for the Veterans Administration , which provided benefits and services to veterans for 58 years , are estimated to be $29.2 billion in fiscal 1989 .
The budget for the new department , which assumes Cabinet status in March , calls for a $700 million increase .
Among the budget proposals are a slight increase in outlays for medical care , from $11.4 billion in 1989 to $11.5 billion in 1990 .
Proposed outlays for total pensions are $4 billion , a $94 million increase over the estimated total for fiscal 1989 .
