With less than two weeks to go as one of the longest-serving cabinet officers in American history , Secretary of State George P. Shultz offered a rare glimpse of some of the things that try his patience .
It was a valedictory speech of sorts , delivered Monday night on the occasion of a `` farewell event '' for Shultz sponsored by a private group called the Citizens Network for Foreign Affairs .
Shultz touched only peripherally on foreign affairs in the speech , focusing instead on the things that trouble him in Washington , where he has lived off and on for 30 years , more than 11 in the cabinets of Presidents Reagan and Nixon .
Some of Shultz 's pet peeves:  --People who say that America is in decline .
`` These are false prophets , '' Shultz said , contending that great powers that have declined were imperial , absolutist or dominated by `` tradition-bound classes . ''
America , he said , is none of these because American democracy holds the potential for resilience and rejuvenation .
--Lie detector tests .
Within an office or department or any organization , Shultz said , putting trust in people will produce trustworthy people -- the foremost of many reasons against the widespread use of lie detector tests .
`` Management through fear and intimidation , '' he said , `` is not the way to promote honesty and protect security . ''
--People who leak and lie and do n't know when to give up .
There 's nothing wrong with fighting before a decision is reached , he said , but `` leaks and lies subvert honest discourse . ''
Once decisions are made , they should be carried out , like it or not .
--Legislative sabotage .
As Shultz described it , `` dialogue between the branches cannot yield productive results when , no matter what the apparent agreement , any faction , any staffer , any subcommittee , any member of Congress can delay and impede even the will of the majority . ''
--Bureaucratic encroachment .
The Defense Department should n't tell the State Department how to negotiate with the Soviets and `` the CIA should n't find policy more fun than intelligence and objective analysis -- because when it does , its intelligence and analytic products have no credibility . ''
Shultz was too polite to name names , but his comments on the CIA seemed aimed primarily at agency 's late director , William Casey , who was better known within the State Department establishment for his advocacy of hard-line policies than for disinterested analysis during his six years at the CIA .
As for the Pentagon 's perceived encroachment on State 's turf , there seems little doubt that Shultz had in mind former Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger , with whom Shultz had many a run-in .
Concerning those lawmakers who Shultz says do n't play fair , none gave him a harder time than Sen. Jesse Helms , R-N.C. , who singlehandedly was able to hold up confirmation of State Department appointees not to his liking for months at a time .
Casey , Weinberger and Helms all are known for their conservative views , but Shultz took on some liberals as well .
He expressed satisfaction that all the candidates who advocated protectionism ( mostly Democratic presidential aspirants ) last year were soundly defeated .
And he also seemed to have liberals in mind when he attacked the `` declinists '' -- people who espouse an American withdrawal from the world in order to regain economic or moral security .
`` They play to the darker side , to the idea that America no longer has anything to give the world , '' Shultz said .
Despite the many disappointments and discouraging times Shultz encountered , he seems satisfied that most change has been for the better since he first came here .
`` On the whole , the facts suggest optimism , especially optimism about America 's future , '' he said .
`` I find that while some things are worse , much is better . ''
