James David Watkins , the former naval commander reportedly chosen by George Bush to head the Energy Department , is an authority on nuclear warfare who will put that expertise to work trying to clean up the nation 's crumbling atomic weapons plants .
Watkins , whom CBS said has been picked to be Energy Secretary , will take over an agency charged with overseeing the multibillion-dollar renovation of the nation 's aging and increasingly unsafe complex of plants that build nuclear warheads .
Watkins ended his 41-year Navy career in 1986 after a four-year stint as the chief of naval operations , the service 's top officer .
But within a year , the former nuclear submarine commander had stepped into a new hot seat .
In October 1987 , President Reagan picked Watkins to head the presidential commission that was supposed to tell Reagan what the nation should do about AIDS .
Watkins , used to command , jumped in with authority , guided the panel through exhaustive hearings and led it to a series of widely praised recommendations .
Watkins was born March 7 , 1927 , in Alhambra , Calif. , near the Los Angeles harbor .
His mother was Louis Ward Watkins , who ran unsuccessfully in 1938 for the Republican nomination to California 's Senate seat , one of the few women at the time who sought national office .
He later recalled that his mother used to take him and his brother down to nearby Navy ports to watch the big ships come and go .
She sometimes arranged to get the three of them aboard the ships , where they dined with officers and heard tales about life on the high seas .
It was those stories -- and the ships -- that helped convince Watkins he wanted a life in the Navy .
He entered the Naval Academy in 1945 , just as World War II was winding down .
Following his graduation four years later , Watkins served aboard destroyers and submarines , earned a master 's degree at the Naval Postgraduate School , and then made a decision that helped steer the course of his career .
Watkins went into nuclear submarines , where he came under the aegis of Adm. Hyman Rickover , the father of the modern nuclear Navy and the man who played a key role in the careers of dozens of Navy leaders in the post-World War II era .
After completing the nuclear reactor engineering course at the Oak Ridge , Tenn. , National Laboratory , Watkins took command of the nuclear-powered attack sub Snook .
Watkins steered the Snook into the harbor at Yokosuka , Japan , the first visit of a nuclear-powered ship to the only nation which has been the target of nuclear attack .
More than 5,000 demonstrators greeted the ship .
Watkins rose within the Navy 's ranks and became commander of the Pacific Fleet , based in Honolulu .
He was in that post in March 1982 when Reagan picked him as chief of naval operations .
In that post , Watkins helped oversee the big naval buildup , from 450 to nearly 600 ships , that was at the heart of Reagan 's defense budget during the president 's first term .
Watkins and his wife of 38 years , Sheila Jo , have raised six children .
