George Bush 's Cabinet is emerging as nearly all male , all Republican establishment , but women and conservatives are holding their fire .
Bush 's honeymoon period is quite a contrast to eight years ago when conservatives voiced outrage over several of Ronald Reagan 's Cabinet choices .
The Reagan transition was marked by regular denunciations by conservatives of such Cabinet choices as Donald T. Regan for treasury secretary and Malcolm Baldrige for commerce secretary .
No such outcry has greeted the Bush Cabinet although most of the choices are no more acceptable to conservatives .
The only Bush Cabinet appointee to rank as a conservative hero is former Rep. Jack Kemp , the choice to head the Department of Housing and Urban Development .
Craig Shirley , a conservative consultant who backed Bush for the GOP presidential nomination , said there is a mixed response to the emerging administration .
`` Some are very delighted because Bush struck conservative themes during the campaign and he has n't changed on any of those , '' he said .
`` Others are taking more of a wait-and-see attitude and then there are the historical Bush-bashers . ''
One of the longtime Bush bashers is Richard Viguerie , a conservative fund-raiser , who was an early and outspoken critic of Reagan Cabinet choices .
`` The consensus ( among conservatives ) is , this is not the time , let 's wait , '' said Viguerie .
`` There is nothing to be gained by going out there and pounding the table now . ''
Viguerie was less restrained than many of his conservative allies and he described the Bush appointments as `` very disillusioning , discouraging and disappointing . ''
Throughout his campaign and since winning the presidency , Bush has emphasized his desire to reach out and bring into government people `` who are too often overlooked . ''
If by that he meant women , so far , he has fallen short .
`` I keep being told , give it time , '' said Nancy Thompson , a Republican consultant who was a Bush delegate to the 1988 Republican National Convention .
`` I 've got my fingers crossed . ''
Thompson and Susan McLane , a Republican state senator in New Hampshire , chose to praise the women Bush has chosen rather than bemoan those left out .
Both cited the selection of Elizabeth Dole to head the Labor Department and Carla Hills to be trade representative as encouraging choices .
But McLane conceded that women appear still to be at a stage where they must be satisfied with one or two high-visibility jobs in an administration .
`` I think we are still at that age , '' she said .
As for the president-elect 's attitude toward appointing women , she said , `` I do n't think George Bush has thought about it that much and he has n't thought about it as something important . ''
`` There are only a very few of those top , top spots , '' said Thompson .
`` And to have two -- one and a half , if you will ( Hills would have Cabinet status but not run a full department ) that are that visible , that 's good . ''
Thompson said she expected to see far more women in the next round of appointments .
`` I 'm waiting for this second cut .
I believe that 's where we 're going to find some names . ''
Rep. Lynn Martin of Illinois , a strong Bush supporter from the earliest stages of the presidential campaign , was on many lists of potential Cabinet appointees .
`` My name was being thrown around a lot , not necessarily to my benefit , '' she said .
`` The fact is he never asked me to serve in his Cabinet and I do n't know if I would have or could have .
... I think there was an assumption I was talking to him every day and it just was n't so . ''
Martin , who denied any personal disappointment , said , `` I know he has asked again and again for the group around him to give him the names of more women , of more Hispanics or more blacks . ''
`` I believe we 're going to see a lot of women , '' she added .
`` And if we do n't , the shoe drops . ''
