The man who would be education president says he 'll push certain public school reforms and provide whatever aid he can in `` tough budgetary times '' to districts trying to improve their schools .
`` I do want to help , '' President-elect Bush told educators Tuesday at a White House workshop on experiments that give parents wide freedom to select their children 's public schools .
`` I do intend to provide every feasible assistance to states , to districts interested in further experimentation with choice plans and other valuable reforms , '' Bush said .
`` I will ask the Department of Education to monitor and focus continued attention on the need for future progress , and I 'll be a spokesman and advocate for further public school improvements . ''
Bush said he is particularly enthusiastic about having parents and students being able to choose their public schools , calling the prevailing system of assigned schools a trap and their students `` captive clients . ''
`` It 's a system that can perpetuate mediocrity , '' he said .
`` Poor schools have no incentives to improve . ''
Supporters of choosing schools say it makes schools more competitive and responsive , improves morale and attendance , reduces disciplinary problems and dropouts , and improves learning among students .
President Reagan , addressing the workshop earlier in the day , cited the examples of `` a Harlem school district in which scores have risen dramatically because parents are now permitted to choose which school to send their children to '' and a Minnesota program `` that is fostering unprecedented competition among public schools to make them more attractive to parents and students . ''
Referring to the Supreme Court 's Brown v. Board of Education in 1954 that integrated public schools , Bush said it is now time to focus on what goes on inside those doors .
`` Quality education has become a central civil rights question of our time , '' he said .
`` And too often today it is our disadvantaged children who are most likely to be burdened by inadequate public education . ''
Bush said that for choice to work , teachers and principals need greater autonomy and authority , while parents need better publicized , more reliable performance evaluations of schools .
The heads of the nation 's two teacher unions both attended the workshop and said they were encouraged by the emphasis on strengthening public schools , as opposed to giving needy parents public money to send their kids to private schools -- a recurring Reagan administration theme .
`` I did n't hear anything about vouchers or tuition tax credits and those would be the red flags for us , '' said Mary Futrell , president of the National Education Association .
`` To the extent you increase public school choice , you decrease pressure for vouchers and tuition tax credits , '' added Albert Shanker , president of the American Federation of Teachers .
