A vast majority of Americans support programs to help the chronically poor , according to a survey released today by a civil rights group .
The NAACP Legal Defense and Education Fund also said it found further erosion in opposition to busing to achieve school integration .
`` The survey demonstrates that the public is primed for presidential action and leadership on race relations issues , '' said Elaine Jones , deputy director-counsel of the fund .
The survey found that 93 percent of whites and 95 percent of blacks favored special school programs beginning at age 8 to motivate poor youngsters to stay in school and not drop out .
Ninety percent of whites and 95 percent of blacks favored federal youth corps camps where poor young people could learn to read and write and attain other skills .
Similar majorities supported business incentives to provide jobs in poor neighborhoods .
Among blacks , 79 percent said the best long-term way to combat crime was not `` to spend large sums of money sending criminals to prison and keeping them there a long time '' but to `` spend the same money attacking the causes of crime , such as reducing poverty , keeping young people in school and motivating young people to succeed rather than become criminals . ''
Among whites , 81 percent agreed .
The civil rights group said the poll was taken June 3 through Sept. 12 by Louis Harris and Associates and based on interviews with more than 3,000 people .
The report was unclear as to the margin of error .
According to the survey , 57 percent of whites remained opposed to busing children to achieve school integration but 67 percent of blacks remained in favor of it .
Among all Americans , it was favored by 54 percent .
Until two years ago , opposition among all Americans had remained a consistent 78 percent for three decades .
The survey was accompanied by a separate study documenting conditions among the black poor .
Eighty-six percent of single mothers surveyed received no funds from their families or the government to pay for child care .
Just 11 percent said they received federal or state housing subsidies .
Sixteen percent reported having private health insurance , compared with 60 percent among all Americans .
The NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund Inc. is a separate and distinct organization from the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People .
Founded in 1940s , the New York-based group has played a major role in many of the battles or the civil rights era .
