The commission trying to find a way to eliminate the huge federal budget deficit has the go-ahead from President-elect Bush to start putting its proposals in writing .
Bush sent word to the National Economic Commission that he would like to have the group 's recommendations in hand by March 1 .
Bush 's decision was being hailed by commission members as a sign that the president-elect planned to use the 14-member panel 's work in his own budget negotiations with Congress .
The commission , which includes such leaders as Chrysler Chairman Lee Iacocca and AFL-CIO Chairman Lane Kirkland , was created by Congress with the hope that it could come up with a deficit-reduction package acceptable to the new administration and Congress .
Commission co-chairman Drew Lewis said the panel would be able to meet the deadline , and many panelists expressed pleasure that Bush had decided not to postpone the commission 's report until Sept. 1 , which he had the option of doing .
Some had feared that Bush , who was critical of the panel during the presidential election , might decide to delay the report in an effort to play down any recommendations from the panel .
Lewis said he was told of the reporting decision on Tuesday by Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady , who will retain that position in the Bush administration .
Lewis said Brady told him to prepare recommendations over the next seven weeks unless he hears otherwise from Bush once he takes office on Jan. 20 .
The commission met Tuesday to review the outlook for the economy .
The assumptions the panel decides to use for such things as economic growth , inflation , unemployment and interest rates will have a big effect on how much in deficit reductions it will need to recommend to eliminate the budget deficit in coming years .
Bush said during the presidential campaign that the commission was little more than a stalking horse for tax increases , which Bush has vowed to oppose .
Since winning election , however , Bush has insisted he is serious about reducing the federal deficit , partly to calm fears of foreign investors and prevent a run on the value of the dollar in foreign currency markets .
The advisory panel , which is headed by Lewis , a Republican , and by Democrat Robert Strauss , has scheduled a string of hearings this month and next to craft a plan .
Originally , those hearings were to be held in secret , but a group of news organizations won a court battle last week that forced the sessions to be opened to the public .
Lewis , former transportation secretary in the Reagan administration and now chairman of Union Pacific , said Tuesday it was possible that the commission might be forced to issue a majority and a minority report because differences among panel members could prove too wide to bridge .
He said there was also a possibility that even after the commission issues its report , it may be called back into session by the administration if a deadlock develops with Congress over the budget .
`` If the president-elect and Congress ca n't solve this problem , then we probably would be brought back into action , '' Lewis said .
The meeting Tuesday was the first one attended by Bush 's two appointees to the panel , former Sen. Paul Laxalt , R-Nev. , and former Rep. Thomas Ashley , D-Ohio .
